# Intrinsic-Sex-Schema-Etiology-Model
This is where I will post each version of my working model for an alternative etiological theory of transsexuality

# A Very Fast and Loose Explication of "Intrinsic Sex-Schema" etiological theory of transsexuality

## Section 1: The Theories in Question

It is often said by supporters of Ray Blanchard’s etiological transsexual typology, that there is no serious theoretical alternative when it comes to explaining the etiology of transsexuality. That the only alternative is a long debunked “brain in the wrong body” hypothesis. This only appears to be the case because up-to-date theoretical alternatives have not been formally synthesized or modeled. Here I will quickly and loosely synthesize an alternate line of thinking from the literature, and additionally, add my own elements to it. 

The theoretical picture we’ve inherited from Ray Blanchard is a set of two etiologies that together are thought to explain nearly all cases of transsexuality or “Gender Incongruence”. The first etiology is the “Homosexual Transsexual” (HSTS) etiology. This is the far less fleshed out of the two. Put simply this etiology is (somewhat ambiguously) about either feminization, androphilia, or a combination of the two. Commentators on the topic disagree on whether HSTS is primarily motivated by a desire to optimize ability to attain masculine male partners, or whether it is primarily motivated by a strong sense of being woman-like, due to feminized behaviors and cognitions (including attraction to masculine men). There is no clear theoretical account on this afaik. (this is a roadblock that must be overcome before we can compare theories properly). In the past it was said that the HSTS etiology is not a good explanation for transsexuality in bisexual natal males. This could be a reason to take the theory as implicating attraction to very masculine men as the primary driving force behind the etiology, however this could have also simply been because at the time it was widely believed that bisexual orientation did not really exist in men, and that it was more likely some men had bisexual behavior for some other reason such as very high sex drive, or paraphilia (such as in the theoretical case of the next etiology). Anecdotally, I have encountered people who claim to have experienced either of these two potential primary drivers of HSTS

The second etiology that has received more attention and theoretical development, is the Autogynephilic (AGP) etiology. There is some inconsistency in the way autogynephilia is defined in the literature, however I will attempt to construct a definition that most accurately captures the way it is used in evaluations of data by the most pre-eminent researchers behind this theory:

An Erotic Target Location Inversion of a gynephilic sexual orientation

Breaking that down further, a “gynephilic sexual orientation” is a psychological trait inducing a stable sexual attraction towards female-perceived stimuli. This is mostly uncontroversial. “Erotic-Target Location Inversion” (ETLI) is my own term meaning the same thing as “Erotic Target Location Error” (ETLE) but with a more neutral connotation. I will define this in terms of the theoretical model by Bailey et al (2023). An Erotic-Target Location Inversion is a phenomenon where an outward sexual attraction becomes directed at the self, so that the subject is attracted instead/additionally to embodying the form of their attraction. This means that the ETLI is causally dependent on an externalized attraction towards the same form. This is not to be confused with an “Erotic Target Identity Inversion” (ETII) which is when an ETLI causes a subject to “imitate, yearn to be, or identify as an instance of their erotic target”.



Under the AGP etiological theory, putatively AGP-etiologic trans women experience a female gender identity as a result of an ETII about the female form, which causally depends on an ETLI about the female form, which causally depends on an external attraction to the female form. Because of this, either bisexuality or gynesexuality are necessary for a subject to be implicated.

As I mentioned before, there are other definitions of AGP given, however they seem to lead to confusion, or bad theoretical work. One such definition by Hsu et al. (2015) states “Autogynephilia is a man’s paraphilic tendency to be sexually aroused by the thought or image of himself as a woman”. There are two issues with this.

Specifying that it refers to “a man’s” tendency specifically is at best unnecessary and at worst obfuscatory, leading to linguistic confusion when talking about ideas such as “Autogynephilia in women”. Consider for example a person who defines “war” as “a violent struggle for power between two factions… in North America”. It would then be confusing when it comes time to evaluate identical scenarios happening on other continents. However I feel very safe in disregarding this element of the definition as more of a description, as the same authors have gone on record saying that they believe autogynephilia could be “rare” in natal females, and because they have conducted empirical research on the question of how common autogynephilia is in natal females.If it were truly a part of the definition, it would be easily dismissable a prior. While some proponents of the theory do fall into the trap of dismissing the possibility of Autogynephilia in natal females this way, the researchers behind the theory tend to have other reasons for doubting it. 
Leaving the gender specifier aside, the remaining definition makes it almost trivially demonstrable that natal females do in fact have autogynephilia. Quantitative research on Object of Desire Self-Consciousness (ODSC) Theory and Erotic Self-Focus (ESF) as well as qualitative research on women’s sexuality from “In the garden of desire” (Maltz & Boss)  and “My Secret Garden” (Nancy Friday) make it very clear that some such autoeroticism of one’s own female embodiment is not uncommon in women. While Charles Moser’s research on autogynephilia in cis women is rightly criticized, if you pay attention to just single items of the scale that don’t fall under those criticisms, it is very clear that some such autoerotic tendency exists commonly in his sample of cis women. We can discuss this more in a later section where we compare the merits of these theories. Despite this, the researchers behind the typology will tend to say it probably isn’t AGP but something superficially similar. Bailey has also given his doubt of the existence of sexual orientations in women as a reason to doubt the analogous “autoandrophilia” could exist in natal females. For these reasons it seems clear to me that they actually take the underlying mechanism of an ETLI acting on gynephilia, to be the true definition of “autogynephilia”

This definition game is also important when it comes to evaluating the claims of researchers opposed to the typology. Julia Serano frequently writes about “autogynephilia theory” as if AGP specifically refers to a paraphilic sexual attraction to the self as a woman that causes transsexuality. And following that understanding she will say the construct has been debunked or disproven entirely, while citing research that merely casts doubt on the status of the etiological theory, and the evidence that it is common in trans women. If understood properly, it is clear that the existence of AGP has not be debunked, and it is clear that even Serano’s alternative Female Embodiment Fantasy (FEF) framework leaves open some unexplained autogyno-eroticism in cisgender males that could be reasonably explained by AGP.

Outside of the sexology literature, in the more mainstream areas of human behavior research, a largely distinct theory of the etiology of transsexuality has been explored extensively. In its most primitive incarnation, the general thought was that trans people effectively had the brains of the opposite sex. This is the “brain in the wrong body theory”, and this theory is clearly lacking when considered with today’s knowledge. It’s not just the fact that we have identified many features of trans women’s brains as not being particularly cross-differentiated, or being only partially cross-differentiated, but also just the fact that we know now that there’s no such thing as “the female brain” or “the male brain”. We know that sexual differentiation in the brain of either genders is like a mosaic of mixed masculine and feminine features. So it just can’t be that simple. And that’s why it’s not that simple any more. As early as the 90s, pre-eminent researchers like Swaab were already refining their thought. The idea was no longer that trans women simply have a woman’s brain in a man’s body; instead researchers began to identify potentially crucial features of the brain that might be responsible for “gender identity” and might be cross-differentiated in the brains of transsexuals. At the time the popular target was the Bed Nucleus of the Stria Terminalis. The research at the time had many limitations, and since then researchers have taken their search elsewhere.

What I would like to draw from primarily is a line of research started by Ivanka Savic in 2011. Savic and other researchers realized that simply engaging in an unstructured search for “brain differences” in subjects with Gender Incongruence would not be efficient. Instead, they drew from theory in the neuroscience literature about self-related processing, to identify networks of the brain likely to be implicated in Gender Incongruence, based on the core psychological characteristics of the condition. This has been a very fruitful approach as researchers have been able to consistently find that disturbances in these systems are associated with Gender Incongruence.

There are smatterings of theoretical thought propagated throughout this line of research. Rather than attempting to string them all together, I will simply present a fleshed out theory under my own banner. We will call it the “Cross Sex-Schematic Etiology”. I call it an etiology because I intend for this theory to fit together with HSTS and AGP to complete the puzzle, rather than as a total replacement.

Under my theory, we keep AGP as a possible etiology. Same definition as I gave before. It’s great.

We keep HSTS, but we will be very clear and define HSTS as an etiology where the primary driving force is an attraction to very masculine men.

What we add, is the Cross-Sex Schema Etiology. Put very simply, in this etiology, subjects have a specific system in the brain that is cross-sex differentiated (often along with other systems, but not always), and the system in question is a system that intrinsically encodes a gendered/sexed element of “the core self”. “The Core Self” is a neurocognitive construct first explicated by Panksepp and Northhoff in 2008 where they presented evidence for a trans-species brain system across mammalian species, that integrates interoceptive and exteroceptive stimuli, together with intrinsic goals/drives, to form an intrinsic concept of self that is readily available to animals from a very young age, allowing them to properly navigate their physical and social environments. This can also be thought of as an “Intrinsic Self-Schema”. This is already an established construct. What is not established, and is instead introduced by me here today, is the idea of an Intrinsic Sex-Schema. The Intrinsic Sex-Schema is just a subset of the Intrinsic Self-Schema that is specifically about sexed aspects of self. 

Why would such a thing exist? Well it’s really not that hard to believe. Let’s take inventory of some things we can take for granted:

1. **There are some intrinsically encoded aspects of self.**
We see this in the Somatosensory Homunculus and in the Trans-Species Concept of Self theory
2. **We have some intrinsic concept of sex.** 
Obviously we don’t come with a deep understanding of sex or gender, but we all seem to come pre-equipped with systems in the brain that differentially respond to males vs female stimuli (Sexual Orientation for example), implying the concept is somehow encoded from the start. We don't need to learn anything at all for our sexual-response systems to discriminate between preferred and nonpreferred sexual partners, based on sex characteristics 
3. **Evolutionarily, it is useful for social creatures to know what sex they are.**
As social creatures we develop social norms when in groups. Some of these social norms are gender specific, and it seems that not all of them are caused entirely directly by innate disposition differences. Humans especially are big on learning. You don’t want to learn the wrong norms, for risk of being outcast. A reflective higher order ability to tell what sex you are is good for sure, but just like in the case of sexual orientation, it’s better if it is lower order and automatic. Something that can kick in automatically at a very young age.

Ok, now because we are trying to do science, we also have to attribute some observable implications to this theoretical structure. So let's do that. 

1. **Previously observed implicit and explicit cognitive-biases in self-related processing should generally extend to sex, and sex categories**
Research finds that people have a tendency to preferentially attend to, and process more deeply stimuli that are perceived as being more relevant to the self. For example the “cocktail party effect” where you will easily hear your own name through all the noise. People also tend to have more positive views of self-related stimuli. For example people tend to prefer their own initials over other letters.
2. **Aforementioned biases should be present in babies**
3. **Small children raised as “gender neutral” should generally exhibit disproportionate role-modeling after peers and adults of the same sex**

And if we think this is cross-sex differentiated in some individuals

1. **Increased cross-sex peer and adult role-modeling in early childhood**
2. **Dissonance between implicit sense of self, and perception of sexed aspects of Own-Body**
3. **Depending on what theory we use to explain the non-relational Erotic Self-Focus phenomenon (Fertel, 2021) seen in cisgender heterosexual men and women, we might expect some level of cross-sex autosexuality, distinct from ETLI autosexuality**
In their dissertation, Evan Fertel found evidence in two studies for a non-relational element of “Erotic Self-Focus” (ESF) in cisgender heterosexual men and women. And found that this tendency is greater among women than among men. “Erotic Self-Focus” just refers to the manifest tendency to attend to the self during either erotic scenarios, or erotic fantasy. In Bailey’s model of ETIIs we can see that ordinarily, focus on a given subject/object in a sexual context, is caused by the sexual attraction. Fertel’s samples were both restricted to only include cisgender men and women who identified either as completely-heterosexual or predominantly-heterosexual. This interestingly shows that there is some system other than sexual orientation/attraction that can promote focus on certain subjects/objects in a sexual context. One possible theory for explaining this phenomenon is an extension, or reformulation of the Object of Desire Self-Consciousness (ODSC) theory. ODSC Theory proposes that especially for women, there is a reproductive advantage in being sexually aroused by/attracted to/oriented towards the experience of being aware that men are (or will be) sexually attracted to her. Specifically to her body/appearance. The theory assumes that historically, appearance has played a greater role in women's reproductive success than men’s. a la evolutionary theory, we could then reasonably see selection for women who have not just a sexual attraction towards men, but a sexual attraction to being attractive to men. This makes the motivation to be sexually attractive more direct. An intrinsic value rather than being an instrumental goal in the pursuit of another intrinsic value. This particular version of the theory does not fully explain Fertel’s findings. First of all, pre-existing scales intended to measure ODSC only show moderate-high correlation with the ESFQ. Second of all, many items in the ESFQ very clearly remove the possibility of any relational aspect that would be inherent in ODSC. But we can make a small adjustment to the theory. The essence of the advantage thought to be conferred by ODSC is that women with higher ODSC will actually become more attractive to men, than women without it. However, in a purely relational form ODSC requires learning what men find attractive. Social learning is always a bit lossy. What if instead you just had that knowledge intrinsically? Is that possible? Well yeah it is, because hetero men certainly have it intrinsically. And right there we have a potential theory of non-relational ESF. Along with there being an evolutionary advantage to having some attraction to the experience of being an object of desire, there would also be an evolutionary advantage to having some internalized-gynephilia. Note this is clearly distinct from Autogynephilia as a theoretical construct, because autogynephilia is theoretically specified as an Erotic-Target Location Inversion. That is, it depends on an externalized gynephilia to be inverted. This theory for ESF does not involve that, and what has been observed as non-relational ESF was observed in a sample primarily made up of women who identify as completely heterosexual, or else who identify as predominantly heterosexual (no bisexuals or lesbians).

## Section 2: Quantitative Modeling

Here, I am sleepy, so I will quickly outline the rationale behind aspects of the quantitative models you can see in my jupyter notebooks

### Sexual Dimorphism of the brain

Modern neuroscience research finds that brain regions are sexually differentiated like a mosaic. It's basically what looks like a relatively loose factor structure between different brain features. So I created a mostly arbitrary list "mascfem_loadings" of factor loadings for a corresponding set of mostly arbitrary brain features, that each generated subject with have in the list variable "self.features". The values of the features is determined by a linear combination of the corresponding loading, a "self.mascfem" scalar variable, and a gaussian error term.

the "self.mascfem" variable is simply by gaussian rng. the Subject class has a male and female subclass. for the male subclass, the mean of the Mascfem rng is a positive number (depending on model version) and for the female subclass it is a negative number. So every suject essentially has an underlying "latent" level of masculinity or femininity, specified by a gaussian mixture. And then individual sexually dimorphic brain features are manifest variables that load onto that

The first two features of the features list are the only ones that are not entirely arbitrary, and are instead meaningful parameters of the model tuned to fit the data. They correspond respectively to the sexual differentiation of regions encoding sexual orientation, and sexual differentition of regions encoding intrinsic sex-schema. 

### Determining AAP and AGP

because my theory includes ETII's AAP and AGP have the potential to occur in any subject. Really, the functions for AGP and AAP are gated by a threshold on the differentiation of sexual orientation features, such that an unambiguous degree of androphilia/gynephilia are required before the rest of the function runs. Given that a subject posesses requisite gyne/androphilia, the AGP/AAP is then modeled as an Exponential function. This is because that's kinda what it looks like when you consider the data in genpop natal males from Bailey & Hsu 2022, where they had several samples take the core AGP scale. 

After this, there is ANOTHER function gatekeeping the relation between AGP/AAP, and AGP/AAP-ETII. Assuming AGP/AAP is present, ETII is then modeled with a very low base rate times a multiplier that is 1 + a tetration of the level of AAP/AGP. The idea being that for every bit of increase in AAP/AGP, the urge to become transsexual will be much higher. Then a binomial rng flips the coin to see if this subject is ETII-Etiologic or not. 

### Determining Cross Sex Schema and Sexual Identity

Both of these are just determined by thresholds on the corresponding brain feature variables

### Tuning.

The goal with all of this was just to try and get the model output to match pre-existing descriptive population statistics such as the proportion of people who *identify* as straight, gay, bi. And the proportion of people who are *transsexual*, as well as the proportions of *trans women* who identify as lesbian, bi/pan, and androsexual. So you can see some of that laid out in the generated data in the notebooks. So far it's looking good i'd say. 

### Implications

After the fitting of the model, even though it isn't yet validated, that's when we can look to see what the model implies about things like under my theory, what proportion of transbians are AGP vs non-AGP. It also shows some things that are really important to me, like how theoretically it can look like an effect of cerebral feminization in trans women dissapears when you control for sexual orientation, EVEN if there is genuinely an effect of cerebral feminization that even impacts many (but not all) trans lesbians with only minorly feminized brains. (because its a loose factor structure!!)

